The 16th, Monday morning, and I am visiting with
Dr. Herman Brown, head of the Department of
Agricultural Education.
Back to August, I mean November 16th at Scotes
Hall. Scotes Hall. Scotes Hall Inn. Texas A&M
University, Dr. Herman Brown, head of the
Department of Agricultural Education. And we're
going to talk a little bit about changes. And
you've been here since 19... 66. 66.
You preceded the College of Education. Yes. And
you were in the Department of? agriculture
education at the time. Right. See, I have not got
this department straight in my head. I know I've
already visited a couple of people, and it's in the
part in the education and part in the agriculture.
We have a dual appointment, College of Education,
College of Agriculture. Administratively,
we're in the College of Agriculture, but
nationally our ties with the College of Education
as it relates to certification. To
certification, all right. Primarily
certification. Again, there's other courtesies
extended here in the employment of personnel and
so forth. Okay. Now, tell me a little bit about A&M
when you were here in 66 and some of the major
changes as they relate more to the College of
Education, because my dissertation is the
history of the College of Education. I know
there's a little bit written up to 1967. There was a
Robey thesis that talked a little bit about what
happened before the college was initiated. So can
you take it from there for a little bit? In 1966, we
were Department of Education. At that time, Dr.
Frank Hubert was responsible for that. He had
other responsibilities in the College of Liberal
Arts. Naturally, in 1966, total enrollment at
Texas A&M was possibly, I don't recall
specifically, 7 or 8,000 students. So we're
certainly not talking about size magnitude then
as we are now. at that particular time we were just
bringing in our first females we did not have a
large department of education at that time our
relationship really in ag education has not
changed that much because we were still in
agriculture but our ties were very strong with the
college of education we serve as we do today on all
of their committees unless it's an in-house type
of college committee. At that time we served on the
Council on Teacher Education just as we do now.
Certainly the numbers, I think the quality is not,
certainly not what is demanded today because at
that time the College of Education was no
different than any other segment of the
university as far as grade point requirements or
any other standardized test. Yes, I think we've
come a long way since 1966 or the past 21 years from
our perspective. And other than the women and some
of these, you know, the growth, is there anything
that in the external environment that affected
your department growth or your... other than just
the numbers growing? Have there been changes in
society or philosophical change? Any kind of
changes that have affected your department? It
seems as the university has increased in numbers,
our numbers have steadily declined over the
years. We are more directly associated with
agriculture than what we are education. And as I
put both of those together, agriculture and
education, that's somewhat of a vulgar term. It's
not an in vogue term today among people. Both of
them have a negative connotation. And so we have
slipped in enrollment through the years. We have
managed to turn that around at this point in time.
But our numbers in the department are not today
what they were in 1966 or 1970. Give me
just a couple of numbers just for ideas. Say maybe
what's your enrollment now versus what it might
have been. OK, our enrollment right now is
approximately 160 undergraduate students. And
in 1970, it would be something like 225.
OK. When you say negative connotations,
do you mean that both things have negative
connotations? Well, yes, there's lots of things
involved here. Agriculture, first of all, the
economy is down. An oversupply, an overabundance
of agricultural commodities. We have an emphasis
on the so-called higher education track system in
our public schools, in which very few students are
really encouraged to go into agriculture. For
example, if you have a 1200 SAT, school counselors
are prone to recommend one of these so-called
professions, or what I refer to as a syndrome, my
son the medical doctor, my daughter the lawyer.
Those professional things, I believe, have
captured the eye and imagination of our
counselors. Counselors have a profound impact
upon young people and where they go to school in
their advisement. So with that combination, I
think that we've had to restructure our
recruitment procedures for... to maintain
enrollment. And you said you're turning that
around right now. Is there something special that
you're doing?
We're working primarily with teachers of
agricultural science in our public schools and
the extension people, asking them just to provide
us with one or two names of outstanding students in
their school who might have an interest in
agriculture. at the senior, junior, sophomore,
and freshman level. We have selected about 150
teachers across the state. They provide us with
that information and then What we do is we get on the
telephone and call these people. And say sometime
at 6 o'clock in the afternoon, and that's when Mama
is home fixing the evening meal, and we really
don't want to talk to the student as much as we want
to talk to Mama. We recruit mothers, and if we can
sell them on the idea that we will certainly look
after the son or daughter while we've got a friend,
then it makes recruitment much easier for us. As
the changes now in this case, it's reversed for you
because most of them, the numbers have gotten so
big that my question is how has it affected your
working with students? Does the numbers allow you
to have more time then to work or interact with
students or is it the same? No, no difference from
that perspective. For the simple reason we have
several service courses in this department. So as
the university increases its enrollment and the
placement of the core curriculum, which includes
some of our particular courses, then we've had to
increase the number of service courses that we
provide. Which are the core curriculums? For
example, Agricultural Ed 440 Methods of
Technological Change is one of the social science
courses that's adopted. Okay. committee and we
also have one 340, a youth leadership training
program. And I'd say in those two courses, 90% of
the students are our total enrollment, non-AGET
students. In fact, in the teacher certification
option, those two courses are not even required.
I'm asking this a lot in the College of Education,
and I don't know how it pertains more to the
agriculture, but the mission of the land grant is
the teaching, the service, and the research. How
is that balanced in your department? Do you
emphasize one more than the other, or are they
equal? Well, certainly the teaching, research,
and service is the part that you're talking about
here. We feel like we're strong in teaching. We
feel like that we're exceptionally strong in
service activities, in working with people on a
non-credit type basis. We recognize the need for
research, but that is by far our weakest area. We
have research going on, but funding becomes a
major problem, and we are not a member of the
Agricultural Experiment Station in the College
of Agriculture, which funds the research. And
because most of our research is in the area of
developmental research. And that does not seem to
be the major thrust of research today in the social
sciences.
Okay, now collaboration, and obviously because
you're in both departments You have some
collaboration with both. Is there collaboration
between your department and other areas to any
great extent? Well, as I put it out here, we're
already outside for one thing. So I look upon our
collaboration with the College of Education just
as much as any other college. Certainly right now
our inquiry group, we're a vital part of that. So
I'd say... Well, Sylvia, we have an opportunity
here. We get to serve on twice as many committees as
most other departments. And so, you know, it's
really reinforced. Do you consider that a plus or a
minus? I consider it a plus. Now, it does get
time-consuming. I think if we could spend some
time on research instead of preparation for these
meetings. For example... We have two department
head meetings a month in the College of Education,
whereas we only have one in the College of
Agriculture. So I find no problem with this for the
simple reason that what one dean brings up in one
way, then the other will bring it up in another way,
then I feel like I can understand what is needed a
little bit better. So there's no problem there.
HOW ABOUT PERCEPTIONS OUTSIDE THE COLLEGE? YOU
KNOW, HOW IS THE COLLEGE? WE TOUCHED A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT IT AND ABOUT COUNSELOR'S PERCEPTIONS AND SO
FORTH. IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE? I GET THE IDEA SINCE
I SERVE ON A DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL, MEANING THAT THE
DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL IN YOUR COLLEGE IS
EXCEPTIONAL AND IS ABLE TO RAISE TONS OF MONEY
BECAUSE EVERYBODY OUT THERE, YOU KNOW, IS VERY
SUCCESSFUL AND HAS ALL KINDS OF MONEY. WHEREAS FOR
THE COLLEGE OF EDUCATION, WE HAVE HAD very
difficult time raising any amount of money
whatsoever. So how does that... Well, okay. Now
here, I don't want to get on the bandwagon a little
bit, but this is one of the primary reasons that
education is not a profession to begin with. And
until we become a profession, we are going to have
that difficult time of raising money. Now the
medical doctors, one of the One criteria for being
a profession is that the profession supports its
students with scholarships. We see that in the
medical profession. We see that in engineering.
We see that in the law profession, the ministerial
profession, all of those things. So until we
arrive at that point. Now the other thing, true
dedicated teachers don't have money. I mean,
gosh, after all, They have a salary. It's a
full-time job. You can't make your millions and
fortunes just in the summertime. So really,
teaching is more of a dedicated group of people
where the fiscal or financial rewards do not seem
to be as paramount as it does with those involved in
private business. So I think we're just going to
have to accept we will never be an elitist group
from that point of view. Now, there may be some
things that we need to do. For example, the former
Students Association here at A&M is stronger now
than it was 20 years ago because of numbers. The
College of Education is still in its infancy, and I
think in time to come, maybe 25 years down the road,
then yes, we will be able to attract some dollars.
But I don't see any way of doing it this time. It's a
losing cause.
OK, you just touched a little bit about the future
and what the College of Education might be later
on. What about this upheaval in the whole new
teacher training program and how everybody's
going to be affected by that, or at least some
departments? Now, you have your students take,
are there some that take education courses, or is
it, how is the tie? For example, an undergraduate
student, do they take half of the courses here and
half in the College of Education, or do they have to
just take the number of courses to be certified?
OK. We have what we call vocational
certification. And really, don't ask me how to
differentiate between secondary
certification, vocational education. I don't
see that different. Now, our students have a
48-hour program in agriculture, which is
comparable to the two 24-hour teaching field. In
addition to that, Currently, we have 24 hours of
required professional education, and that has
been very specifically identified as 12 hours of
ag ed to include six hours of student teaching and
12 hours from the College of Education. Now,
we have followed that track for many, many years,
The Commission on Standards of the Texas
Education Agency is the one that dictated the 12
and the 12. So
those changes, we just have to live with. Are they
going to affect you drastically? I mean, if they
change where you can only take, what, 18 hours of
education, including teaching? Then we will have
12 hours of ag ed and six hours of professional
education. we are in disagreement with some of the
philosophy that's being espoused at this time as
to a five-year program uh we contend that
currently we don't really have a four-year
program now we have a four and a half or five-year
program and then you complicate this with a
another year plus an internship year which we're
talking about seven years possibly, and then this
qualifies an individual to start at very minimum
wage. Now, in this department, we're a little bit
different than some of the others. Most of the
graduates of this department will be the
breadwinner of the family. This will not be a
secondary income. So at $15,000 to $18,000 a year
after seven years of training, will certainly be
the kiss of death in many respects to this
department as far as numbers are concerned. Now,
it is my understanding that we can have companion
four-year programs and five-year programs. So
that decision, final decision, has not been made.
We know that there's some support on this campus
for the philosophy of the Holmes group, We
understand that NCAID is revising their
standards, which may have an impact on some of
this. But to be perfectly honest with you, the time
may come when an attempt will be made by this
department as a matter of survival to withdraw
from NCAID accreditation.
Do you have a choice on that? No, not really. But at
this point in time, we have two deans to satisfy.
And we have a dean of agriculture who says my
departments must all be competitive at the same
number of semester credit hours. So he cannot
afford to let one department have 130 hours for
graduation and another one 155. And these are
going to cause some problems. And then you throw in
the core curriculum. I think what we're seeing
here at this point in time that is very frustrating
to the professionals in this department is that we
have two EA standards, which is mandated
legislatively. We have the Southern
Association. We have NCATE. We have our own
institutional core curriculum requirements.
Then we have a college requirements. And then if
the Holmes group comes in, It just boils down to a
matter of how many masters can be served. So that
pretty much answers my question on the future. So
right now it seems a little fussy. There's
certainly uncertainty. Okay. Now let's talk
about Herman Brown and some of the highlights or
some of the things that you have experienced. I'm
having the difficulty getting people to express
their contribution, they prefer somebody else to
do it, but what do you feel the best about what's
gone on since you've been here that you've
impacted or influenced?
Well, first of all, I think I have served on every
committee in the university, and many of them as
chairman. We're talking about faculty
committees. We're talking about elected
committees to the university under the provost,
under the president. This is a continual thing as
we continue to strive for maturity. I think that
the greatest contribution maybe we as faculty
members in this department, and specifically
Herman Brown, to be honest with you, we are the only
vocational unit at Texas A&M University. We do not
have home economics, we don't really have T&I,
business administration, health education, and
those types of things. So I think that we have been
able to add a flavor to programs, especially at the
advanced degree level, to provide
administrators and potential administrators
with a vocational philosophy that they might not
get otherwise.
Give me the philosophy as you see it from this
department or how it might differ from other ones
in the College of Education, for example. Some of
them do not have it even, it's not expressed, it's
just sort of understood, but is there a philosophy
as such from this department that you espouse?
Well, sure. We have our own written goals and so
forth, but what it boils down to is the
compatibility of general education and
vocational education. And this is another
concern that we have today.
Every youngster in high school, it'd be
impossible for them to all go to to college or
higher education. So we have some who cannot meet
the entrance requirements. We have some who
really don't have an interest in higher
education. Now, what are these young people going
to do? So we say that general education has to be
strong, but that vocational education has a place
in the public schools for those who have an
interest in a livelihood that requires training
less than a college degree. So what we're seeing
here is that we feel like there's a need in the
public schools to offer programs that train young
people for entry-level world of work
experiences.
It's sort of like my homespun philosophy of what is
vocational education. I jokingly tell folks at
times, it is that training that helps keep people
off the welfare road. If young people have a skill,
then they can be productively employed. And I
contend that everybody wants to be productively
employed and not be on the welfare rolls or without
employment or living on the family. So really I see
general education and vocational education
being very compatible, going down the railroad
track side by side, If you push me which one is the
most important, certainly I'm going to have to say
general education. In my own personal
philosophy, there's not enough money to pay the
salary of a good first grade teacher and a second
grade. That's where it all starts. Personally, I
have some philosophies with kindergarten,
pre-kindergarten.
You know, I just think that there's a time when
young people need to be Babies, sometimes we don't
let them be babies long enough. I have a daughter
who is a school teacher who gave me my third
grandchild this past Friday afternoon. And
economic conditions, the way they are, as soon as
she possibly can, she'll have to go back to the
classroom. So my grandson is going to have to be put
under somebody else's care, against my wishes.
But that's the way the economic and social
structure seems to work today. Okay, what about
any insights or observations or even an anecdote
or so that might stand out in your mind over this
long standing career that you lead? Oh, I've had
lots of good things to happen.
In this department, we take great pride in that
All of our people have received the Distinguished
Service Award in Teaching by the Informal
Students Association. So these are some of the
things that we strive for. It's sort of a personal
goal. But to me, that indicates a level of
excellence in teaching, especially when young
people say, hey, you're good enough for this type
of award. Our young people, we have one faculty
member who will be In December, become the
president of all the teacher educators in
agriculture in the United States for 1987-88. Who
is that? That's Dr. Don Herring.
We have another young faculty member who is a
member of the Young Astronaut Program in
Agriculture, Dr. Joe Townsend. And he spends time
in Florida with that group and will be going down in
December. And that has to do with the coordination
of science and agriculture in the space program.
We'd like to be on the cutting edge here. Someday we
will, agriculture will be as much of an outer space
as it is here in this country. Maybe not in our
lifetime, but we're starting on that. So we have
lots of good things going for us along those lines.
There was a time when the pendulum was way over on
the vocational and agriculture and all. And then
it keeps going back and forth, though, right? I
mean, right now, would you say it's swung the other
direction by your comment about the negative
attitude towards... not only agriculture, but
vocational in general, isn't it, with this parole
thing? Has that had a real, really great impact on
Attitude? Well, first of all, a lot of people
condemn Ross Perot for his involvement in the
educational process. I am not that critical of
Ross Perot because we had changes in agriculture
that needed to be made that we could not make for the
simple reason we had a clientele of teachers who
would not accept it. So we needed somebody strong
and forceful like Ross Perot to come in and mandate
some changes. Can you specify a couple of those
changes? Those changes in which we will do away
with the traditional production one, two, three,
and four of agriculture, of teaching shows and
contests, of getting away from the production
aspect of cows, plows, and sows, and get into some
semester courses. And this department and this
faculty, on a faculty retreat about a year ago, we
developed 23 semester-length courses that is
being implemented across the state. And due to the
diversity of agriculture in the state, the
teachers and the community can select courses
that's applicable to them. For example,
the folks in the Rio Grande Valley, they've got a
specialty type of agriculture in citrus that
students in Amarillo just don't have a need to
know. Now, we're not talking about basics and
fundamentals and principles. But we have
generally broken this into areas such as the
horticultural sciences,
the agribusiness, the ag mechanics, the
environment, and these things can be applicable.
For example, I can see a need in the Houston area for
somebody to get involved in the raising of
research animals. Rats, guinea pigs, hamsters.
Hey, that's agriculture.
But that might not be true at SNCC. For example, the
only area where primate animals are raised is in
San Antonio. I'm not saying that we're going to get
involved in raising monkeys and so forth as a big
agricultural enterprise, but I think we have
become so highly specialized that we can no longer
cover the waterfront in our teaching. So that's a
big change. So House Bill 72 and 246, we've even
been impacted by Senate Bill 994. Now we're able to
keep our name, agricultural education. And we
don't have to go the interdisciplinary route like
some of the others. We appeared two weeks ago
before the advisory committee, coordinating
board in five minutes time we pleaded our case and
look we've got 48 hours of agriculture we only have
24 going to 18 hours of education it takes 12 hours
in your major to get a degree from an institution
they said fine good you don't belong under this
umbrella here of senate bill 994 which we feel good
about so those are just some of the impacts and in
closing do you have any words of wisdom Well, I
never did have much wisdom, but I think one of the
biggest problems that we're running into, I
think, at this time, in addition to all these
things that we have discussed, the paperwork has
become horrendous. And I'm sure this is in all
facets of society. And so much of our work today is
involved in what I have referred to here, that we
are involved in too many non-teacher education
functions. And I think whenever that happens,
this takes away from the close relationship and
working and concentration on the improvement of
the individual who will be going into the
classroom at some point in time. So I am hopeful
that in the years to come that we can devote more
time to working with the certification program.
try to better prepare young people for the
classroom. Again, we're at odds on some of these
things. We have one half semester of student
teaching, or nine weeks. And we have a number of
folks who are advocating a whole year of student
teaching. And we have asked for research. There is
no research. And we talk about research-based
competencies. There is no research. That tells us
that one full year or even one semester of student
teaching is better than a half a semester. Now, a
concern that we really have in this department is
that we've got the pre-student teaching work in
the schools, we've got student teaching, and then
we've got a year of, a proposed year of internship
in those schools. Now, it's well and good for us to
be working with these individuals, but what about
the poor student that's in school trying to get
through the elementary and high school when he or
she is subjected to student teachers or bombarded
by student teachers or observers every day of the
week? I think that no one has really addressed this
problem.